No truly great or fine mind was ever yet utterly lost to the world;--nay more,--no mind containing within itself the capacity for any kind of greatness, has ever been so far the slave of circumstances as to be completely smothered by them; force of any kind, mental or physical, must expend itself, otherwise it is not force, but weakness.  And thus it has always happened, that when there has been no place found for its evident and external operation, it has yet, by turning inwards its mental vision, found ample room and verge enough, in exploring the recesses of its own nature, its origin, and its hopes.  To trace, through generation after generation, and age after age, the superstructure raised by time upon one such mental substratum, might be the study of a life; and it was in the expectation of finding some steps hewn towards the attainment of this extended view, that we eagerly took up the ‘Mysticism of Plato.’  But to those, who, attracted by the volume contained in this title, look to find some, if it were only the small coin, of the riches of imagination, or the treasures of heart-wisdom, it will prove a disappointment.  Such is not here.  We find ourselves suddenly in the midst of scholastic criticism, couched, it is true, in most nervous and eloquent sentences, on the old subject of the logos.  The body of Plato is there, but, alas! the soul is afar off.
	Yet this criticism has its use in these days of dogmatical controversy, and rarely is it touched in so philosophical a spirit.  The author shows   In the comprehensive spirit of his master's doctrine,  the evangelist identified him with the Platonic logos, and it was only in after times that the word was personified, and the mystic doctrine literalized, and vulgarized, misrepresenting alike the apostle and the philosopher, and fabricating from the language of metaphysical truth, common to them both, a preposterous creed, to be enforced by persecution.
	The name of Plato made us expect more and other matter.  Doubtless at this time but a faint semblance can be had of that unfathomable and majestic mind, and that little only to be grasped by those who have an ardent love and search after that truth and beauty which is immutable, and of which, were there the desire for it, some portion might be seen by all, as it rests not in things, but in the mind of the searcher.  Still, for this work, if he did no more, the author must rank high among those who have done good in their generation; with an ardent, yet acute and calm intellect, he has boldly stepped over the little mud entrenchments, and innumerable hillocks which are error's favourite abiding places; and though he has not passed on to the high mountains, yet his is not the mind to be discouraged that still higher and higher the bright peaks arise beyond him, nor because that the distance is to our sight lost in clouds; he will go on his way rejoicing in each inch of ground gained to the good cause; and with heart and soul we say, God speed him.  Will the realist smile, and the cold-hearted scoff? Surely,--for is not the power of each being to approach the source of all good, limited by the imperfections of its own character? So it was from the beginning, and ever will be.  But if when the fulness of time shall have come, and the mists shall have cleared, and the sun shine out fully, better spirits shall predominate, then will they bow their hearts to the few, who, through doubt and thick darkness, kept alive a hopeful faith in higher things. 
