Much has been said and written, of late years about the proper influence of women, the proper rank of women in society, and so forth.  But all this saying and writing, through all with a very good intent seems to me to be beside the mark.  The extent of the false state in which women stand with regard to the rest of the community is in nothing more shown than in the mode by which they are defended.  As the corrupt state of the unreformed House of Commons was shown by the fact, that members of it were not wanting to declare it altogether a pretty and well-working body.  All that has yet been said respecting the social condition of women goes on the assumption of their inferiority.  People do not complain of their state being degraded at all--they complain only that it is too much degraded.  Now real lovers of justice will rather that their condition should get worse & worse rather than partially better--in as much as when a certain point of abuse is reached their comes from the nature of things a sweeping and large reform.  Moderate reformation may be pleasant for the present time only, but on a wide calculation no reform unless a thorough one, will in a calculable time produce the best result.  We hear nothing of the proper influence [of] men, the social rank of men--because that is established--but we hear of the proper degree of power which men should make over their own property and the proper influence of the national voice in the national interest--because these points are yet in an artificial and debatable state.  It is not wonderful that white those men who beleive [sic] their own happiness to depend on other mens [sic] political degradation, should also hold the subserviency of women to be a needful ingredient in their creed of selfish and sensual enjoyment.  But it is a lamentable instance of the strength of habits of opinion, that men who in their relation to all other men would be just even to generosity, yet in the case of women go on unthinkingly in the belief which their early associations of the natural inferiority of women.
	To a person who wished for truth and justice I would say in regard to this supposed inferiority:  that were women generally to show as much talent as men in the present state of society, I would argue, not equality but superiority--because they are entirely deprived of all those advantages of academical or university instruction emulation & example which are open to all men:  and what is much more important to the formation or development of individuality of character, the whole repute of their lives is made to depend on their utter exclusion from any source of knowledge or experience of the world--and the varieties of scene & of character which must be known and tried to give self knowledge, and decision of mind--and general information and useful ability.  All this is entirely denied and a woman who has energy sufficient to choose and to act for herself--becomes a mark for the obloquy1 of the great and little vulgar of both sexes--nor must it be thought strange that the great majority of women contribute much to their own debasement.  Denied open power, they attain often an absolute power, by indirect and unworthy means--holding the condition of slaves they exercise retaliation by the vices of slaves, duplicity especially is a characteristic of women--yet who that knows any thing of a womans [sic] genuine nature but will declare frankness, generosity, to be peculiarly its attributes.  Their extreme susceptibility[,] their fine nervous organization renders this almost a part of their physical nature--and in the old times of veils and cages, women were not deceitful because they we[re] so thoroughly2                as to see no wrong in the matter.
The Roman Helot
	The born slave seldom complains, his mind is as degraded as his body by hopeless subjection. The Roman Helot and the modern Greek aware of better things, in the one case by violence in the other by deception, as suitable to their respective age, have kept in fear their taskmasters.  Neither have seen that as free members of the community they might have been incalculably more useful to others and more happy themselves.
	The ‘Veil & Cage’ era of womens [sic] condition always been coeval with, the mere ‘physical force’ era of mens [sic][.]  a society once emancipated from either can never return to it.  and the progress of this emancipation has always borne the same proportion, has evidently not been actually the same because in the first stage of physical force alone women were necessarily behind mans [sic], & so must continue, as long as physical power exercises any influence over the moral power of a community. This is now fast ceasing to have a recognised existence, altho’ it was not till [sic] quite late years that a man of a slight make was legally protected from the man of Hercules proportion--and even now, to their disgrace of the time bodily punishments are tolerated in the army, and in some schools--but this cannot last long.  And every step in the recognition of the power of opinion is a guarantee for the improvement of women.
