More than two hundred years ago, Cecil1 said ‘Tenderness & sympathy are not enough cultivated by any of us; no one is kind enough, gentle enough, forbearing and forgiving enough.’  In this two centuries in how many ways have we advanced and improved, yet could the speaker of those words now ‘revisit the glimpses of the moon’, he would find us but at the point he left us on the ground of toleration: his lovely lament is to the full as applicable now, as it was in the days of the hard-visaged and cold-blooded Puritans.  Our faults of uncharitableness have rather changed their objects than their degree.  The root of all intolerance, the spirit of conformity, remains; and not until that is destroyed, will envy hatred and all uncharitableness, with their attendant hypocrisies, be destroyed too.  Whether it be religious conformity, Political conformity, moral conformity or Social conformity, no matter which the species, the spirit is the same: all kinds agree in this one point, of hostility to individual character, and individual character if it exist [sic] at all, can rarely declare itself openly while there is, on all topics of importance a standard of conformity raised by the indolent minded many and guarded by a fasces2 of opinion which, though composed individually of the weakest twigs, yet makes up collectively a mass which is not to be resisted with impunity.
	What is called the opinion of Society is a phantom power,3† yet as is often the case with phantoms, of more force over the minds of the unthinking than all the flesh and blood arguments which can be brought to bear against it.†  It is a combination of many weak, against the few strong; an association of the mentally listless to punish any manifestation of mental independance.  The remedy is, to make all strong enough to stand alone; and whoever has once known the pleasure of self-dependance, will be in no danger of relapsing into subserviency.  Let people once suspect that their leader is a phantom, the next step will be, to cease to be led altogether and each mind guide itself by the light of as much knowledge as it can acquire for itself by means of unbiased experience.
	We have always been an aristocracy-ridden people, which may account for the fact of our being so peculiarly a propriety-ridden people.  The aim of our life seems to be, not our own happiness, not the happiness of others unless it happens to come in as an accident of our great endeavour to attain some standard of right or duty erected by some or other of the sets into which society is divided like a net--to catch gudgeons.
	Who are the people who talk most about doing their duty? always those who for their life could give no intelligible theory of duty? What are called people of principle, are often the most unprincipled people in the world, °if by principle is intended the only useful meaning of the word, accordance of the individual's conduct with the individual's self-formed opinion.°  Grant this to be the definition of principle, then eccentricity should be prima facie evidence for the existence of principle.  So far from this being the case, ‘it is odd’ therefore it is wrong is the feeling of society; while they whom it distinguishes par excellence as people of principle, are almost invariably the slaves of some dicta or other.  They have been taught to think, and accustomed to think, so and so right--others think so and so right--therefore it must be right.  4This is the logic of the world's good sort of people; and if, as is often the case their right should prove indisputable wrong, they can but plead those good intentions which make a most slippery and uneven pavement.
	To all such we would say, think for yourself, and act for yourself, but whether you have strength to do either the one or the other, attempt not to impede, much less to resent the genuine expression5 of the others.
6Were the spirit of toleration abroad, the name of toleration would be unknown7.  It is8 one of those strangely named qualities[,] a ‘negative virtue’.9  
	It represents at best but the absence of vices, and under the shadow of whose respectable name many sins of omission pass.  To tolerate is to abstain from unjust interference, a quality which will surely one day not need a place in any catalogue of virtues.  Now, alas, its spirit is not even comprehended by many, ‘The quality of mercy is strained’, and by the education for its opposite which most of us receive becomes if ever it be attained, a praiseworthy faculty, instead of an unconscious and almost intuitive state.
	‘Evil-speaking, lying and slandering’ as the catechism formulary has it, is accounted a bad thing by every one.  Yet how many do not hesitate about the evil-speaking as long as they avoid the lying and slandering-making what they call Truth a mantle to cover a multitude of injuries.  ‘Truth must not be spoken at all times’ is the vulgar maxim.  We would have the Truth, and if possible all the Truth, certainly nothing but the Truth said and acted universally.  But we would never lose sight of the important fact that what is truth to one mind is often not truth to another.  That no human being ever did or ever will comprehend the whole mind of any other human being.  It would perhaps not #be possible to find two minds accustomed to think for themselves whose thoughts on any identical subject should take in their expression the same form of words.#  ~Who shall say that the very same order of ideas is conveyed to another mind, by those words which to him perfectly represent his thought? It is probable that innumerable shades of variety, modify in each instance, the conception of every expression of thought; for which variety the imperfections of language offer no measure, and the differences of organization no proof.  To an honest mind what a lesson of tolerance is included in this knowledge.  To such not a living heart and brain but is like the planet ‘whose worth's unknown although his height be taken’,10~ and feeling that ‘one touch of nature makes the whole world kin’11 finds something that is admirable in all, and something to interest and respect in each.   ~In this view we comprehend that 
	‘All thoughts, all creeds, all dreams are true,12
	All visions wild and strange’--
to those who believe them, for after all we must come to that fine saying of the poet-philosopher,
	‘Man is the measure of all Truth
	Unto himself’
of the same signification is that thought, as moral as profound, which has been often in different ways expressed, yet which the universal practice of the world disproves its comprehension of, ‘Toute la moralité de nos actions est dans le jugement que nous en portons nousmeme’13--‘dangerous’ may exclaim the blind follower of that sort of conscience, which is the very opposite of consciousness:  would but people give up that sort of conscience which depends on conforming they would find the judgement of an enlightened consciousness proved by its results the voice of God:

	‘Our acts our angels are, or good or ill,
	Our fatal shadows that walk by us still’14
and to make them pleasant companions we must get rid, not only of error, but of the moral sources from which it springs.~  
	As the study of the mind of others is the only way in which effectually to improve our own, the endeavour to approximate as nearly as possible towards a complete knowledge of, and sympathy with another mind, is the spring and the food of all fineness of heart and mind.  There seems to be this great distinction between physical and moral science; That while the degree of perfection which the first has attained is marked by the progressive completeness and exactness of its rules, that of the latter is in the state most favourable to, and most showing healthfulness as it advances beyond all classification except on the widest and most universal principles.  The science of morals should rather be called an art:  to do something towards its improvement is in the power of every one, for every one may at least show truly their own page in the volume of human history, and be willing to allow that no two pages of it are alike.
	Were everyone to seek only the beauty and the good which might be found in every object, and to pass by defect lightly where it could not but be evident, if evil would not cease to exist, it would surely be greatly mitigated, for half the force of outward ill may be destroyed by inward strength, and half the beauty of outward objects is shown by the light within.  The admiring state of mind is like a refracting surface which while it receives the rays of light, and is illuminated by them gives back an added splendour; the critical state is the impassive medium which cannot help15
		The sun's beams but can neither transmit nor increase them.  It is indeed much easier to discern the errors and blemishes of things than their good, for the same reason that we observe more quickly privation than enjoyment.  Suffering is the exception to the extensive rule of good, and so stands out distinctly and vividly.  It should be remembered by the critically-minded, that the habit of noting deficiencies before we observe beauties, does really for themselves lessen the amount of the latter.
	Whoever notes a fault in the right spirit will surely find some beauty too.  He who appreciates the one is the fittest judge of the other also.  The capability of even serious error, proves the capacity for proportionate good, [sic]  For if anything may be called a principle of nature this seems to be one, that force of any kind has an intuitive tendency towards good.
	We believe that a child of good physical organization who were never to hear of evil, would not know from its own nature that evil existed in the mental or moral world.  We would place before the minds of children no examples but of good and beautiful, and our strongest effort should be, to prevent individual emulation.  The spirit of Emulation in childhood and of competition in manhood are the fruitful sources of selfishness and misery.  They are a part of the conformity plan, making each persons [sic] ideas of goodness and happiness a thing of comparison with some received mode of being good and happy.  But this is not the Creed of Society, for Society abhors individual character.  It asks the sacrifice of body heart and mind.  This is the summary of its cardinal virtues would that such virtues were as nearly extinct as the dignitaries who are their namesakes.
	At this present time the subject of social morals is in a state of most lamentable neglect.  It is a subject so deeply interesting to all, yet so beset by prejudice, that the mere approach to it is difficult, if not dangerous.  Yet there are ‘thunders heared [sic] afar’ by quick senses, and we firmly beleive [sic] that many years will not pass before the clearest intellects of the time will expound, and the multitude have wisdom to receive reverently the exposition of the great moral paradoxes with which Society is hemmed in on all sides.  Meanwhile they do something who in ever so small a circle or in ever so humble a guise, have the courage to declare the evil they see. 