This new work of the author of Vivian Grey and Contarini Fleming is of a quite different class to either of its predecessors as the title indicates it is a story of by gone times and in so much appears to be a more suitable feild [sic] for the author’s talent than the delineation of character or the construction of phycological [sic] autobiography.  There is shown in those works an absence of both the contemplative and analytical habit of mind which are needful to the comprehension of any emotion which has not actually formed part of the individual experience, and of any fixed theory of moral principles, with an evident, almost ostentatious display of carelessness on such points.  In the Tale of Alroy the author paints rather than describes--and this is his province.  He appears to have a most vivid enjoyment of physical and inanimate beauty, and the taste which is innate in persons of acute sensations.  This is the temperament for improvisitation: [sic] and the carelessness of the style might lead to the supposition that the whole was improvised within a very short time.  It is often poetry in posse:  least so however where occasionally we stumble upon two or three pages or sentances [sic] which rhyme, and which have an odd enough effect--as tho what was intended to be the poetical portion of the book had been mosaic-worked into the prose from some other work.  The real poetry is in the completeness with which it wraps the senses in the scenes and objects it describes or suggests.  as we read we are unconscious of receiving any impression from the white paper and printers [sic] ink.  The space between the eye and the book glitters with gems.  We are environed by gorgeous eastern sights and sounds--sunshine & perfumes & beauty & triumph.  The very type, bold and untroublesome, ‘meandering like a river of print through an oceean [sic] of margin,’ savours of Oriental ease, and each page contains a picture.  The melodramatic effect is perfect.  There needs neither scene nor actor--as by the Arabian nights a spectacle is presented to the mind of each reader, varying in colouring and grouping as the fancy and the imagination vary.  There should have been no story, or a better.  It is a heap of eastern images with little order or connection, yet all Orient pearls, though at random strung:  words of beauty are clustered upon each other--reiterated, in language soft and glowing, like a dreamy chorus.  It is beautiful enough to bring back our Childish Arabian nights pleasures so beautiful is it that as in the case of so many other beautiful things it makes us sad that where so much is done, so much remains undone.  There is a story but object it has none, and unless the plot be wholly historical, which we do not conceive to be the case, there seems no reason why the plot might not have had a good moral as easily as a bad one (or none at all) unless indeed the authors [sic] experience leaves him without faith in any consistent or enduring purity of purpose or moral energy.  The attempt to delineate noble mindedness seems an effort or mere occasion for pompous language.  The character infallibly breaks down sooner or later.
 	Here is a strain, worthy to be chanted by Babylon’s waters--the feast of the New Moon is one of the most important of the Hebrew festivals.

Instantly the holy watchers fired the beacons on the mountain top, and anon a thousand flames blaze round the land.  From Caucasus to Lebanon, on every peak a crown of light!

