We will open our sketch of the incidents of a life, not at all singular in its incidents, but only in the organization and mental developement [sic] to which they were applied, by describing the effect, at the age of seventeen, of what is commonly supposed to be a sufficing and suitable education for the purposes of a woman’s being.  Helen Astley was an only child.  Her parents were rich, of gentle descent, and, as things have been, might be said to be persons of good education.  They had sufficient taste to enjoy a life of comparative retirement among the groves and alleys of the provincial estate, and to cultivate literary occupations rather than the vapidities of what is called society.  They were among the best specimens of what has been, until lately the best class of english, the higher middle rank.  Bland in manner, exceedingly kindly in their intercourse with their neighbours and dependants, & of liberal political feeling:  while in an inverse ratio to their capacity for forming opinions for themselves, was their tenacity in adherring [sic] to those they accidentaly [sic] adopted.  It may be supposed that with such persons the care of an only child was looked upon as a matter of great interest, and her education as a charge of the utmost importance.  In their own phrase they were determined that their daughter should become ‘a throughly accomplished woman’.  And accomplished she was, thanks to ‘masters’ & ‘mistresses’ of all kinds:  but thanks to nature she was also something better.  Nature had dower’d her with a heart and a soul. with mind and strength.  These were cramped, but not extinguished...
	[S]he promised to honour a being, mentally & morally her inferior--to obey a lesser intellect & a temper uncurbed by responsibility and to love for ever more a person of whose existence they had been ignorant six months before, & for whom her affection was yet in the bud and so she became from that moment & [sic] a dependant upon him for her daily food, which she was to purchase by personal concession of the & which on experience she abhored nature of which she was totally ignorant.
