	I have been much interested by your remarks on the Unities. but will you excuse my saying that with some of them I do not find myself able to agree without some modification.  Of course I quite concur with you as to the error of excluding from the province of art many subjects admirably adapted for it, tho’ not capable of being brought within the Unities.  I also admit that ideal & not material imitation is the object of Art, & that resemblance to the mere material circumstances is not to be attended to as a means of producing effect, but only as far as to avoid any clashing or shock to the imagination which might interfere with the legitimate & designed effect of the ideal likeness.  All this is indisputable:  but what I cannot quite go with you in, is the opinion (substantially that of Johnson1 in his preface to Shakspeare [sic]) that there is no specific illusion in the case of a drama more than in a novel.  This I have never found to accord with my own personal experience.  Reading a play no doubt is like reading a novel; the imagination makes any jump wh is required of it, without the slightest shock; but why?  Because in reading[,] the imatation [sic] is avowedly ideal only, & as there is no pretence of material resemblance, there can be no feeling of any deficiency in such resemblance:  but when a play is acted, there is an attempt at material resemblance as well as ideal.  The endeavour is that the external sensations of the spectator shall be as nearly as possible the same as if he were actually witnessing the events: & because complete material resemce is attempted & to a great degree attained, therefore any great absence of material resemblance, in certain particulars while it is preserved in others is felt as a shock.
	As an analogous instance--sculpture, not aiming at colour, is eminently beautiful; but paint the statue, & the slightest variance in the colour from that of life, wd be absolutely disgusting.  In seeing Shakspeare [sic]--King John for instance, I can scarcely express to you what a shock it was to me to find embassing2 going & returning, battles fought &c in the mere trifling of a scene.  In reading the play I do not feel that.
	Speaking from personal experience I shd say that the unity of place is of no importance at all.  I find the imagination accomodates itself at once to the shifting of the scene:  The unity of time I find absolutely necessary--only I think it is commonly misunderstood:  the shk to the imagn I always feel to consist, not in passing over a lapse of time, but in supposing evnts [sic] to take place in a single instant wh manifestly require days & hours.  According to my notion of the unity in Wallenstein3 the action all takes place on the stage, none behind the scenes & strikes me that a play acted, differs from a novel or a play read, as painting differs from poetry.   In painting the material imitation is professed (in addition to the ideal) & being professed ought to be accomplished.  We are offended by deviations in points not connected with the [?] effect; but even trifles must be covered in a painting, not bece any thing depends on them, but bece if not rt they are nicly wrong & therefore offend.  When we see a play we do not look on it as a reality, it is true, but nether [sic] do we look on it wholly as a mental conception.  We regd & feel it as a picture (of a pecly vivid kind) & anyhing [sic] wh reminds us that it is but a picture, such as change of scene, does not shock us, but any thing wh wd be a defect in it even as a picture, does.