--is what surely may be undertaken, if not with a mind altogether uninfluenced by preconceived impressions, at least in a spirit not to be betrayed by them into injustice.  Nor is it an occupation uninteresting, to such as have any desire to deal truly with the memory of a person who acted a great part in one of the greatest events that ever befell England.’  Such Lord Nugent declares to have been his object in the composition and publication of this work, which will connect his name in the literature of his country with that of one of her worthiest children.  Much novelty we did not expect to find.  Hampden's was a race which, though short, was too glorious, and too much placed before the eyes of all men, not to have made it necessary that we should, long ere this, have known all that could be known concerning his history, his thoughts and his opinions.  Accordingly, with the exception of a few letters which passed between him and his tried friend, Sir John Eliot, during that illegal imprisonment of the latter, which ended in consigning his worn-out frame to the grave, and his cowardly oppressor to the block he so justly merited, we have no new light thrown upon it here; but that which we had before to gather, from the often contradictory authorities of Clarendon, Denham, Hume, or Godwin, is sifted and arranged with impartiality and elegance.  Lord Nugent's book will take its place among English classics.  Would that the men of fortune of the present day, who share in the general and increasing taste for literature, would profit by his example, and employ their time on biography, that inexhaustible and always interesting subject, rather than on such ephemera as are most modern novels and even ‘Personal Narratives!'--To collect materials, internal and external, to qualify for the editorship of a good biography, is an undertaking which requires much time and fortune; and in no way could those advantages be more usefully employed.  What work of fiction can ever interest our sympathies so deeply as the adventures of those who, in good truth, have voluntarily suffered for the benefit of their fellow-creatures?--the names of Hampden, of Pym, of Sidney, of Vane, are indissolubly linked with our first boyish instinct of love of liberty: we pity him for whom those names do not awaken a host of associations and bring back youthful dreams of high daring, and lofty purpose, and chivalrous honour, and constancy unto the death.--There is a charm in these things which we never lose, because it has its origin in the principle, eternally fixed in humanity, of opposition to wrong.  We love to look back to the old picturesque times of feudal domination, and popular discontent, while sincerely do we hope they may never again return: we look to them for lights on the motives and workings of the human mind;--we see resolved in them the problem of the effect of actions and passions, which effect the men who acted and felt could only surmise and doubtingly hope; we are interested in them as in an important chapter in the chronicle of the world's history.  And they were, for their purpose, fine and grand times, those, when the need of protection gave a species of devotion to the loyalty of the lowly, and the proud consciousness of protecting invested with a factitious nobility the grossness of self-interest.  Then, as since, liberty and religion were banner-words, and perhaps by the mass have been in all times equally little understood.  But, since those high and palmy feudal days, a great moral change has been steadily taking place.  One of tyranny's strongest defences is founded in that blind belief of the many in the sacredness of whatever is in any way superior to them, arising from the principle of reverence, innate in every human mind, and which, if it be enlightened, is the noblest, and if servile, the meanest, of human emotions.  When John's victorious barons established an oligarchy more hateful than the tyranny which it curbed, because more intimately and securely interwoven with what was denominated law, the numbers saw, with stupid vacancy, or with unthinking admiration, the liberty of the subject emblazoned on their bearings.  Their boasted charter partook more of the nature of a patent of nobility, than of a popular defence.  Yet so omnipotent have names ever been found with the multitude, that it was not until four centuries after the establishment of that charter, that the people discovered that they had been cheated by a shadow in the name of a reality.
	The pampered and greedy selfishness of Henry the Eighth, intent only on the gratification of his degraded passions, was the cause of the overthrow of the Catholic faith as a state form, and thereby of the commencement of an important revolution in the habits and education of the English people.  In abandoning their ancient worship, they also dared to question the authority for the doctrine of passive submission which marked the whole band of the ministers of the court of Rome.  Not but that every religion, suffering under the baneful influence of union with the state, will almost necessarily hold the same tone; it has always been so, whatever the faith protected, but that fact was not yet felt.  Luther, and his brother reformers of the church, were amply disposed to reform the state also, could they have found the power; and, as in the case of all new institutions, the first apostles of Protestantism sought popularity by a show of moderation.  True, both Henry and his successors attempted, and often with some success, to unite the old awe of the spiritual, with that of their temporal authority, but it never again bound the minds of men in that entire and willing thraldom which had done.  The sacredness of mystery was gone.  Men had been reared in belief of the immutability of that spiritual power, and of its superiority to all kings, princes, and powers; and when the insolent tyrant dared, unpunished, to question its tenets, supplant its authority, and appropriate its wealth, the charm of habitual reverence, while it left the church, was not transferred to the throne.  There sprung up in its place the small beginnings of those habits of inquiry, which, step by step, have led, in our time, to universal doubt.  This doubt even, we think to be promising of good--to be a transition to purified belief.  To construct a stable foundation we must first clear the ground.  It is not less needful in moral than in mental progression that analysis should precede synthesis.  And the wisest and loftiest of our time see cause of hope in its signs.  But the first effect of men's change of faith was to leave them more free for the consideration of their political condition.  The quick tact of Elizabeth saw the bent of the popular mind: with consummate skill and energy she discerned the points on which she must inevitably yield, she made her concessions before the people had become aware of their power: so that they received from her as acts of grace, what she only had the foresight to see she would have been obliged to concede as pure right.  Thus she not only prevented further demands, but in the very fact of so doing won the hearts of her subjects.  But less than her talent could not have effected the same result.  The weak-minded egotist who succeeded her, invited contempt for his person and for his office; but it remained for the blind pertinacity of his son to put the finish to the work.  The English have always been proverbial for their sensitiveness where their purses are concerned; and though they might have borne, for a time, even greater political humiliation, they were not disposed both to bear it and to pay for it.  The political feelings of the people were roused into action by pecuniary injustice.  But among the men, whose distinction, though not their ability, was born of the tyrannous exactions of the first Charles, were some of the first spirits of any time.  They dared openly to proclaim the nullity of law when opposed to justice and reason.  Hampden, especially, was a man not of this or that time only, but whose mind was prepared to expand indefinitely.  He appeared in parliament at the age of twenty-seven, and was even then distinguished.  After serving in two parliaments he retired, in 1628, to his house in Buckinghamshire.  There he passed the next eleven years, in the quiet and reflection, which are the only efficient preparatives for useful exertion.  There are at any one time in the world few such men as Hampden.  It is one of the most remarkable and admirable traits of his character, that, with the ability to guide others and to meet the most unlooked-for emergencies, he was not only content, he preferred, living within the little world of his affections and of his own high thoughts.  The finest combination of human character is that of calm and trusting simplicity of manner and habits, with the strength of purpose which uncontrollably produces that which it has maturely willed:--such was Hampden's.  During this period he could have been but of little use in public.  It was passed in a series of the most flagrant acts of tyranny and injustice on the part of the king, and on that of the people in an untired opposition.  Imprisoned, branded, fined, and executed, their determination seemed to grow more firm by defeat; their detestation and forbearance arrived at its height.  Hampden watched the spirit of the time: he saw the hour and the occasion when united resistance must succeed.  He took upon himself the danger.  He was the first to refuse payment of the illegal tax, which though it fell lightly upon himself individually, would, had the people then succumbed, have been the means of riveting the disgraceful bonds, which were offered them.  He announced his intention to try in the courts of law the great question which involved the right of one man to unlimited control over the persons and property of every inhabitant of the kingdom.  Clarendon, whose leaning to the court interest hinges most of his conclusions, is forced to yield admiring testimony to his hearing during this arduous period.  He says, ‘till this time he was rather of reputation in his own country, than of public discourse or fame in kingdom; but then he grew the argument of all tongues, every man inquiring who and what he was that durst, at his own charge, support the liberty and prosperity of the kingdom.  His carriage throughout that agitation, was with that rare temper and modesty, that they who watched him narrowly to find some advantage against his person, to make him less resolute in his cause, were compelled to give him a just testimony!' As might have been expected, then venial court decided for its patron.  The King then set his agents at work to endeavour by bribery or intimidation to secure the connivance or the silence of the man whose talents he estimated sufficiently to dread; but he had not in this attempt estimated the force of the principles which he had to encounter.  Having refused both bribes and submission, the leaders of the popular party, among which Hampden was now perhaps the first, felt themselves no longer safe while within reach of the despotic usurpation which they could not yet crush.  They determined for a time to leave England.  It was by a remarkable and fortunate want of policy that John Hampden and Oliver Cromwell, his cousin, were arrested by an order from the king on board the ship in which they had taken their passage for North America.  Thus did Charles, by illegal force, retain in England the man by whose masterly councils the war was carried on, which ended in the forfeit of his life, and the man who was to succeed to his throne.
	After a lapse of eight years, during which the king had resorted to every expedient which he could contrive, to prop up his tottering authority, without a meeting of Parliament, in November, 1640, was held the first meeting of what is emphatically called the Long Parliament: Hampden's place was by all accorded to him among the most influential, and with just self-knowledge he ranged himself foremost in the patriot ranks.  Clarendon well describes the influence of his character at this time.  ‘When this Parliament began, the eyes of all men were fixed upon him, as their patriæ pater, and the pilot that must steer the vessel through the tempests and rocks which threatened it.  And I am persuaded his power and interest at that time were greater to do good or hurt than any man's in the kingdom, or than any man of his rank hath had in any time; for his reputation of honesty was universal, and his affections seemed so publicly guided, that no corrupt or private ends could bias them.  He was of an industry and vigilance not to be tired out or wearied by the most laborious, and of parts not to be imposed upon by the most subtle and sharp.’  At this time the natural progress of affairs was once more checked, and a last chance given to the king by the ascendancy which the moderate party suddenly acquired in the House of Commons: men felt themselves on the eve of a convulsion, fearful in its progress and the end of which was most uncertain; all the horrors of civil wars were before them and they made, in the famous ‘Remonstrance,’ and appeal, which, had Charles not been utterly infatuated, must have been accepted by him with eagerness.  They were willing to pass over in silence his manifold acts of treachery, cruelty, and falsehood: they offered him, unquestioned, all the power and wealth which the law had ever allotted for the support of the dignity, office, or pleasure of the crown; but the man was wholly blinded by selfishness to the real position in which he stood with regard to the country, and in the sword which was suspended as by a hair above is head, he fancied he could discern an instrument with which to enforce the slavery of millions.  The answer to the ‘respectful’ remonstrance of his faithful Commons, was an order, in violation of every law on the subject for the arrest and impeachment of the principal leaders of the opposition: this was in the month of January, 1642, and this may well be considered as the commencement of the war between Charles Stuart and the English people, and it was also the era of the Hampden's short but brilliant course of active exertion.  Accepting a command in the army, he enlisted his tenants and friends into his little band: wearing the colours of his family, the green, which betokens hope, and carrying at their head their leader's motto, ‘Vestigia Nulla Retrorsum,’1 they followed him to the field where he fought and died for the good cause of human amelioration.  He met his death in a manner worthy of him, not in an act of technical duty but in one of generous choice. 
	
	  He put himself at the head of the attack, and in the first charge he received his death-wounds.    His last words were a prayer for his country; and the news of his loss was the signal for universal sorrow.   And thus died Hampden.  It is impossible to read this simple detail without being strongly affected.  The cause for which he had perilled his all, seemed, at the time of his death, to be on the point of succumbing less before the vigour of its opponents than the weakness of its own counsellors.  It must have been bitter to die at the moment when he must have been conscious that his were the talents most efficient for his beloved cause, and when his clear judgment had already discerned the deficiencies of its leaders.  We, who know as matter of long-past history, that result which his earnest gaze could only dimly and doubtingly see shadowed forth in the future, may feel a melancholy gratification in the fact, that he was spared the sight of the unworthiness of some of those on whom his hopes were placed, and the eventual recall of the dynasty by means of which he and his country had so deeply suffered.  But his sacrifice, and that of the numbers of brave and honourable men who fell in the same conflict, was not in vain, did it achieve no more than afford a pattern and precedent for succeeding years.  Who shall say what extremes tyranny might have dared, or to what excess of subjection men might have believed themselves forced to submit, had not the example of the conduct of Hampden and his compatriots, and of the death of Charles, been alive in the world's memory?  Wherever, since, men have armed themselves with courage to beard usurpation or oppression, the English Commons of the 17th century have been quoted for an example of right, and for a ground of hope: instructing each individual to do his best for the prevalence of his own honest notions of right, secure that in the end right must prevail.
	Over the bust of Hampden in the Temple of British Worthies, is this inscription:   
