I do not know what the means of advancing my opinions about ‘marriage’ should be--nor how much of them might be advantageously said to the world.  nor If I could be allowed to be Providence to the world for a few years how I should commence the steps which should prepare its mind to receive the ultimate opinion that all restraint or interference whatever with affection or with any thing which might be or be supposed to be in demonstration of affection is perfectly unwarrantable.  Nothing could be more mischievous than the promulgation of this belief, in the present condition of men--and the time when it might be held beneficially seems so distant that one is sometimes inclined to despair of it.  But I do not despair.  If one individual knows only one, much more if they know several who would be happier and cause more happiness to others by such a system, that is enough to warrant faith that the time may come.  I should think that 500 years hence, there will be nothing among the whole mass of absurdity by which former ages will be remembered, which will so excite wonder and contempt as the fact of legislative interference with matters of feeling--yes there is one thing which will be then as astonishing and as contemptible that men should ever have existed so degraded from all that is beautiful as to find the greatest pleasure of their existence in­the lowest and blindest physical sensuality.
	Any one who would call this ‘sentimental’ nothing could be a greater mistake.1  It is quite plain that all pleasure is ‘from the outward to the inward brought’.  That strictly all pleasures as well as all pains are of the senses.  The difference between good and bad-tending pleasures of sense, seems to me to consist in that the one acts on the mind thro’ the sense--so directly that the fact of the agency of the sense is unconscious--while the other makes sense the sole object.
	There would be no objection to making sense the end instead of the means if it really gave any pleasure which could not be obtained by higher means and if it did not always stand in the way of improvement and the attainment of all that is universally regarded as good.  But this it does:  To find pleasure in mere sensualism is a proof of a very low state of being, and an obstacle to the perception of a better.
	No institution that could possibly be devised[,] seems to be[,] so entirely tending to encourage and create mere sensuality as that of marriage.
	In the first place it makes some mere animal inclination respectable and recognized in itself.
	Then having encouraged this animal want to its utmost by the approval of opinion, it takes care to prevent all voluntariness, at least in the case of one party, by [sentence is incomplete]
	It insists that this connection shall be merely animal by taking away at least in the case of one party all voluntariness.
	It seems a necessary consequence of this institution--that what they call chastity is held in honour among women, as a virtue in itself.  From which follows the immorality that women enter into an agreement to pass their whole life in at least the toleration of a species of immorality of which they are entirely ignorant.  As it is the interest of the marriage institution to confound the ideas of affection, and of sensuality, and as it is the supposed interest of the married to keep up all the latter to himself, the next step is to limit the development of affection to one person, to the original bargainer.
	Marriage is the only contract I ever heared [sic] of, of which a necessary condition in the contracting parties was, that one should be entirely ignorant of the nature and terms of the contract.  For owing to the notion of chastity as the greatest virtue of women, the fact that a woman knew what she undertook would be considered just reason for preventing her undertaking it.
[upside down on same page]
	By marriage I mean a legal obligation wh binds any person to live with, or be dependant on, another, against their inclination--wh makes the person of one human being the property of another.
	No government has a right to interfere with the personal freedom Every human being has a right to all personal freedom which does not interfere with the happiness of some other--
[on the opposite side of a folded page]
	Many2 of the best people--just & strong-minded people even, advocates for improvement, and who see the absurdity of [s]upposing that one state of society & age, can usefully legislate for another & a different state of society--are yet, from dread that evils may arise from any change--unwilling even to admit as a topic of discussion, the possibility of improving the institution of marriage
	Yet none will admit that the institution in numberless instances works its [goods] and it is unworthy of any understanding to refuse to examine, it seems to imply a conscious weakness--we would ‘try all things to the end that we may ‘hold fast that wh is good’.  To refuse to examine its grounds of usefulness can do honour to no cause.[’]
[upside down]
Wanderings of a Woman in thought[,] word & deed--I remember, well my first lesson of democratic feeling--who knew but that it was the foundation of all these wanderings wh I here record.  ‘Twas [a luxuriant] eveng was this
