AMERICA--the nursery of civil freedom; the growing and vigorous disproof of the theory of the necessity of leavening the reason and the demands of the present age, by an anomalous admixture with the opinions and institutions which were wisdom to our fore-fathers, but for the present state of society are worse than foolishness;--that gigantic territory which lay unknown for ages, ripening for the dominion of civilized man, and which less than three centuries has sufficed to transform, from an unbroken forest, to the home of twelve millions of human beings, speaking the language of, and acknowledging their derivation from, an island, which, had we the desiderated lever of Archimedes, might be set down in one of its unoccupied prairie-meadows, without displacing a living thing--this country, as vast and as important in its moral as in its physical aspect, presents to every intelligent mind a subject of contemplation and curiosity which constantly demand materials and knowledge.  As yet this demand has been but scantily answered.  It has unfortunately chanced that, with few exceptions, the descriptions of the United States have been those of persons either of small intellect, and incapable, with their best efforts, of judging between that which is essential and that which is accidental, as instance Basil Hall; or, worse, those whose prejudices make their principles, and whose long-formed habits of subserviency make them fancy servility refinement, and its absence coarseness: and of this latter class is the author before us.  We are always sorry to see any species of talent wasted; and it was with this feeling we laid down the two volumes of Mrs. Trollope.  The descriptions are spirited, and the style so easy and pleasant, that she would seem to possess every mechanical facility for recording, amusingly, any and all the adventures which fate or her own good pleasure may induce her to try.  But here ends all of praise which can be accorded to this book.  It abounds in misrepresentations, which we cannot but think wilful, and the deductions from which are as spiteful as they are imbecile.  To cover the rancour of her dislike to republicanism, the author makes a sort of confession that she had herself a leaning to what she wittily calls sedition, before she saw in America the lamentable effects of freedom and competence; which bad effect she makes to consist in certain coarsenesses of manner among the middle and lower classes, which, as they do not happen to be of precisely the same sort as those of the corresponding rank here, excite the good lady's spleen to the utmost; but which, after all, were the habits and manners of those good old times, of which Mrs. Trollope is, doubtless, and especial admirer.  She admits that the best society in America equals, in refinement of manner, even that of the ‘old countrie;’ while in no class is to be found the empty-headedness, which forms the grand characteristic of our sleek-mannered aristocracy.
	
	This seems scarcely consistent with the continual reiteration of the utter nothingness of the women:; an odd sort of shield that; again:
	Presently, forgetting, we suppose, all she had said about the neglect of the women’s minds, the good lady attempts to be very satirical on the extent of the education they receive.
	
	Here the ridicule is intended to fall on the words,--‘pretty creatures, lovely girl,' &c.: if there is no absurdity in the fact stated, we cannot perceive that it makes any difference whether the pupils were pretty creatures or ugly creatures, boys or girls; but it was an opportunity of blame, and that is Mrs. Trollope's object; in fact, towards the end of her book she distinctly declares her dislike to every thing American.
	
	This is about as logical as the old rhyme,--
	
Only that ‘the reason why,' we doubt not our author could tell, if she would.
	‘The immense superiority of the American to the British navy was a constant theme, and to this I always listened, as nearly as possible, in silence.  But the favourite, the constant, the universal sneer that met me every where, was on our old-fashioned attachments to things obsolete.  It is amusing to observe how soothing the idea seems, that they are more modern, more advanced, than England.  Our classic literature, our princely dignities, our noble institutions, are all gone-by relics of the dark ages.  This, and the vastness of their naked territory, make up the flattering unction which is laid upon the soul, as an antidote to the little misgivings which from time to time arise, lest their large country be not of quite 
	
	In discussing questions relating to their government, and its effects on the social and moral condition of the people, Mrs. Trollope resorts to the old expedient of taking benefit of sanctuary, and deprecating criticism, on the plea of sex; now, if she understand the subjects upon which she attempts to write, there surely needs no apology for stating her opinion; if she were conscious that she did not understand them, it would have been wise to have left them untouched.  The old custom of making gentle critiques for gentle authors is, we hope, falling fast to disuse; and women, as well as men, must be content that their works, and not themselves, form the subject of judgment.  Let both one and the other write only of what they feel and understand; the time is passed for the toleration of crudeness and vapidity under shelter of either sex or rank.
	Here is one of those sweeping decisions in which our author loves to indulge; its severity somewhat mitigated by the saving clause of which we have spoken:--
	
	
	As an amusing instance of the determination to find fault, of pretended humility, and of inconsequent conclusion, take the following remarks:
	‘If I mistake not, every debate I listened to in the American Congress was upon one and the same subject; namely, the entire independence of each individual state, with regard to the federal government.  The jealousy on this point appeared to me to be the strongest political feeling that ever got possession of the mind of man.  I do not pretend to judge the merits of the question.  I speak solely of the very singular effect of seeing man after man start eagerly to his feet, to declare that the greatest injury, the basest injustice, the most obnoxious tyranny, that could be practised against the state of which he was a member, would be a vote of a few millions of dollars, for the purpose of making their roads or canals, or for drainage, or, in short, for any purpose of improvement whatsoever.
	
	but the wonder consists in the consideration that this immense country is governed, to the entire satisfaction of all its inhabitants, at a cost of a trifling part of the sum paid for the misgovernment of the ‘old fashioned little place.’  But the lady thinks an enormous taxation an advantage, which, to be duly appreciated, needs but to be lost.
	
	Our author, after making a comparison between London or Paris, and the larger cities of the Union, of course greatly to the disadvantage of the latter, makes this very candid acknowledgement: 
	Mrs. Trollope pays her tribute of high admiration to the talents of the star of the west, Dr. Channing.
	
	She is, and most justly, disgusted with their cant about religious matters, with hypocrisy of the teachers, and the imbecile credulity of the taught.  But before we can allow this to be a national trait of the Americans only, we must find our own sectarians wonderfully altered.
	It has been said; that absence strengthens strong feelings, and weakens weak ones: travel has an analogous effect in increasing prejudice, where it already exists, or in enlarging the knowledge of those who are capable of loving truth for itself: in this class, we fear, the author of these volumes cannot yet be placed.  She can see but one side of a question; and that, unfortunately, is not the fairest or the happiest side.  The world might be divided into those whose eye rests first on the good and the beautiful in every object, moral or physical, which can be presented to it; and with whom to see evil, is to bend their minds to its removal: or, the larger number, those who would hide, rather than eradicate abuse; with whom ignorance is, if not bliss, at least content, and whose capacity of admiring stands always on the defensive, while their critical faculties are more readily roused to irritation, than their admiring ones to imitation of any good, national or individual, which they do not themselves posses.  But these also, like every thing else, may do good in their generation.  And so we hope Mrs. Trollope's lucubrations may become useful, by calling attention to subjects which cannot be too much canvassed, though we cannot but express a wish that her next performance may be on a subject, which, not calling for the expression of her political antipathies, may allow us unreservedly to admire her power of facile and graceful composition. 
