Walter Denison was the second son1 of parents holding a place in that class known2 in Vernacular tongue by the name3 respectable.  They were persons who had never known what it was to have been dunned4 for a debt, nor to have done an act of generosity:  they loved justice rather than mercy, and called sensitivity romantic.
	[J.] Denison Esq, M.P. for his county,5 & one of the representatives (save the mark6) of the landed interest[,] had never doubted that it was by a mandate of nature that he set despotic power over the free-will, and actions of his mate, and vehemently agreeing to this in theory, she made herself amends for succumbing to one by constaining [sic] all the rest of her household--it was sufficient that any one [of] her children and servants manifested a strong inclination for any subject to cause her to feel a decidedly contrary wish[,]7not that she did not like to give pleasure, but that she, like all ignorant people, enjoyed the consciousness of power of whatever kind & this petty social authority was all that her education had qualified her for, or that her condition in society allowed.8--She had too a pis9 virtue which she called firmness, and this consisted in adhering, without benefit of reason, to an intention once adopted.  Unfortunately, her son Walter, had from his very babyhood manifested the same characteristic, but in him this tendency his mother called obstinacy and almost from the day of his birth commenced the struggle between the [sic] him and his mother.  Walter however had the advantage of unity of purpose, while firmness often shared the throne with a tribe of lesser motives, Walter’s power was concentrated by opposition on the one parent of success--and union carried the day--accordingly at about 5 years old he was pronounced a boy of a very incorrigible disposition.  Any relentings which he might have experienced on account of his mothers [sic] judgment of him, being prevented by seeing that his father had precisely the same opinion of her which she had of him.  Still his young heart clung to her who he soon perceived to be the subject of injustice and it took him but few years to discover that the intellect of father & mother was much upon a par while her heart was sometimes softened to others from the effect of tyranny on herself, his by the exercise of unlimited power, without intellect.  In [?] it had become as hard as
[manuscript breaks off here]
