SUMMER is gone--winter is come.  Which is the most enjoyable of the seasons? is a common question.  Unimpressible by the beauty of any must he be who feels not that it is in the state which he receives each that its power of pleasure lies.  The kind of mind, and the state of mind, make spring of December, or of highest summer, winter.  Autumn, the destroyer, has swept into eternity many a blossom both of flower and heart: its rich suns have set on the wrecks which its gales had made; and its ripe harvest moon has lighted much both of animate and inanimate nature to ‘the bourne from whence no traveller returns.’1  But those setting suns and waning moons may also have been the signal for many a hope's spring, over which the howling blasts of the external world's wilderness pass unheeded, having no power but to say or sing ‘soul take thy rest.’2  And ’tis a fit time for the body, too, to take its rest in winter.  Those curtains, with their heavy falling folds of purple drapery, whose graceful lines erst harmonized so lovelily with the young, blooming green of drooping acacias, and the scarlet bells of the pendant fucia, the lady of the flowers, and by the moral effect of the entire satisfaction they gave to the sense of form and colour, showed forth the utility of beauty,--now reversing the order, make us glory in the beauty of utility, as, drawn closely to exclude the breath of evening, fold upon fold, they meet the downy carpet.
	Yet would we rather be without bread than without flowers in the dreariest days of old December weather.  Now that Cassiopeia,3 bright and beautiful, has taken herself away, chair and all; and Bootes, outdoing the seven-leaguers of our redoubtable friend Jack the Giant Killer, has strode towards some other planet; and the Snake, with its eyes of light, has ‘trailed its slow length along,’4 and vanished in ‘the dim obscure;’5 and were the sky ever so clear, and the stars ever so bright, with their wakeful prying eyes, it is too cold to stay to look at them; have we not laurestinus, white and pure as snow, but not as cold; and holly, with its blood-red drops and crown of thorns like the occasion it commemorates; and the passion-flower, with its exhausted colour and exaggerated form, fit emblem of its name; and chrysanthemum, star-like, with the addition of fragrance, and with its shadows (which it is a pity stars have not--only the moral is good, that light has no shadow) moving fantastically over the rose-tinted wall, as the fitful gleams of our beloved firelight shoot up and fall as good as summer lightnings or northern meteors? Firelight!  We would match firelight against twilight for any number of pleasant sensations.  We never could perceive the supereminent charm of English twilight; it has always seemed to us but another name for darkness, and that not ‘aiding intellectual light;’6 besides that it implies both cold and dampness, two things the most opposed to our notions of enjoyment.
	Like that of the ancient magi is the worship we pay to the bright element, in return for the content which it gives to our senses, and the faculties which it unlocks in our souls.  It is climate and companion too-increasing tenfold the charm of the society of those who we love, the only kind of society worthy the name.
	It is sweet in the still night-air ‘to discourse eloquent music’7 under that deep everlasting roof; and the noblest of earth's emotions fill the soul to overflowing in the silent presence of the infinite sea.  But these, ‘like angels’ visits, few and far between,’8 are scattered sparingly over life’s way; while every day in every winter month may bring the pleasures of friendship and the heart’s home.
	Talk of suicide in November! they must be fit for nothing else who can be moved thereto by bad weather.  Much more natural would it be to leave the world when it is too beautiful to be endured.  In the bad there is something to resist--and resistance is the principle of life, say the learned.  One may imagine some suicidal impulse in spring time, if it were but in impatience of the Mephistophelian mockery of so much beauty and life, and enjoyment and hope.
	All the enjoyments of winter are of the kind which can the most easily be brought within the compass of the individual will.  If they are in their nature less spiritual than those of spring and autumn, they admit of being made the most perfect of their kind.  A thousand checks of custom or convenience may and do arise to prevent our having, in the right mood and with the right society, the breath of morning, newly alighted on a heaven-kissing hill; whence, in the devout stillness of the blue and dewy air, we might look down on ‘the kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof;’9 intense admiration of ‘the world,’10 which ‘is all before us,’ making it hard to bear that it is not for us ‘to choose where.’  But in winter the eye is ‘satisfied with seeing and the ear with hearing,’11 when for the one there is a bright fire, and for the other a voice we love.
	All objects take the impress of the mind which receives them; and if ‘tout devient sentiment dans un cœur sensible,’12 not less does all become vulgarized by a merely external eye.  No more than the flower constitutes fragrance without the corresponding sense, does the unstored mind or frigid heart constitute a sentient being: he whom no ‘spirits teach in breezeborn melodies,’13 would perchance find such breezes but ‘an ill wind that blows nobody good’14-	
	‘The better vision will not come unsought,
	Though to the worshipper ’tis ever nigh.
	After the night, the day--and after winter spring comes again, with its bubbling sounds and sparkling, odorous air, its beamy skies and rapid life; and not the less do we enjoy it that we have made the most of its surly predecessor.  Happiness is the true transmuter for which science has always sought in vain--the fuser of circumstances, the Ithuriel’s spear--‘exalting the valleys, making low the hills, and the rough places plain,’ of the journey of life: it alone can produce the miracle of ‘figs on thorns and grapes on brambles:’ it is the golden sun which gilds all, ‘the blue sky bending over all.’
	Spring-time and flowers! each day brings forth a new class in its progress towards perfection.  ‘Stars of the fields, the hills, the groves!’ Who loves not flowers? Be he who he may, he loves not friend or mistress, his species nor his country; nay, truly loves not himself, for all these are included in self.  As to the more graceful sex, they may see in flowers types of their own nature, often emblems of their own fate.
	 Flowers are utilitarians in the largest sense.  Their very life is supported by administering to the life of others--producers and distributors, but consumers only what, unused, would be noxious.  Ornaments in happiness, companions in solitude, soothing ‘the unrest of the soul.’  Hear what says the classic Roland--‘La vûe d'une fleur caresse mon imagination, et flatte mes sens à une point inexprimable; elle réveille, avec volupté le sentiment de mon existence.  Sous le tranquil abri du toît paternel, jétois [sic] heureuse des enfance avec des fleurs et des livres; dans l'étroite enceinte d'une prison, au milieu des fers imposés par la tyrannie la plus revoltante, j'oublie l'injustice des hommes, leurs sottises, et mes maux, avec des livres, et des fleurs.’15  As impossible as to find two human countenances alike in all their features and expression, is it to discover duplicate flowers.  Who shall say how much of consciousness they may be endued with? It will not be hastily decided that they are without it, by any who has watched and tended them; who has seen in the morning their whole form bend towards light and the cheerful sun; who knows at evening to give the long deep draught of the element they love, and has seen the delicate fibers fill, and the colours brighten, and the stalks expand, and the leaves rise, and, by one consent, do obeisance like the sheaves of the Syrian boy’s dream.  And those which here we speak of are but the favourites of civilization, which, like their human prototypes, by their too abundant training, lose in strength what they gain in richness, which, after all, is but a bad exchange for the graces of nature and freedom.  It is to those which ‘dwell in fields and lead ambrosial lives’16 that we must look for the perfection of their beauty.  ‘Nor use can tire, nor custom stale their infinite variety.’17
	And when Spring’s dancing hours have paved her path, they usher in the stately splendour of voluptuous summer--gorgeous in beauty like an Eastern queen.  Gray’s notion of felicity was to lie on a sofa and read new novels:--our sofa should be the blooming turf, and our book the untiring novel of earth, sea, and sky; while summer airs, heavy with fragrance, float languidly by, mingled ‘keen knowledges of deep embowered eld’18 with high presages of happy future days.  ‘Oh, it is pleasant, with a heart at ease,’19 to revel in the beauty of lurid-eyed summer, while every motion, odour, beam, and tone,
	‘With that deep music is in unison,
	 Which is a soul within the soul!’
	Spring promises, summer performs, and then comes autumn, weaving together flowers and fruits like the garland of an Ipsariote girl.  Its ‘green old age’20 soon changes to decay, and a grave beneath ‘the moist rich smell of the rotting leaves:’21 and so the year dies.  Peace to its manes! Its life and its death are too closely united for us to perceive the parting; and of its seasons, ‘each hiding some delight,’ we would say and feel ‘how happy could I be with either!’