Please return me this paper dear.
	One of the most difficult questions for conscientious persons to settle with any thing like satisfaction to their own feelings is how far we are bound to conform to or to resist, or how far we are justified in conforming to or in resisting laws, or customs having the force of laws, with which we disagree.  Are we justified in rectifying what we think in our individual case the defects of the laws & customs under which we live?  It seems a clear case that if we are willing to endure the penalty we are justified in doing any thing which we ourselves think right.1  But if we have knowingly incurred a penalty whether from law or custom are we, altho’ prepared to accept it, justified in complaining of it?  I think justification of the complaint against it is included in justification of the conduct.  If what the law thinks right we think wrong we are justified in acting as we think right.2 we should be prepared to accept the penalty & to protest against it.  But according to this if every body were conscientious & acted according to their opinions there would be always an immense number of persons acting in opposition to the law because no law or scarcely any receives the assent of every body in the community--it is only because people in general are unconscious & unconscientious that each law does not create its own body of dissenters & society must have attained a perfection too distant to enter into present practical considerations before there can be anything like unanimity upon all the subjects on which the state of the law affects directly or indirectly the great & small interests of life.  

on the whole we think that we are in many cases bound to protest, & in all cases justified in protesting, both3 by speech & conduct4 against laws or customs which we think wrong.
	It is but adjourning the question of principle to say that all who have a vote for a representative must conform to whatever their representative has agreed to; their representative may be in the minority--& whether the representative is with the majority or otherwise does not affect our agreement in his opinion.  Some must always disagree in the vote of the representative of many.  In fact representation is a delusion5.  A representative has only the choice of being a proxy or an approximation:  practically two widely different things.
[bottom of same page]
If we beleive [sic] with Kotzebue6 as we devoutly do that “The will of man in his heaven” we must rectify the laws of our society up to our own conscience & having made our own law, “act the law we live by without fear”
[written on back of folded sheet]
On Individual Collision with Law or Custom.
[2/3 down the page]
This subject leads directly into cases of the duty of considering the public interest in private conduct--as in population---
