There is scarcely any truth or any error, for which with good will to the task, might not be found the warrant of a proverb.  And there is scarcely any proverb1 which does not include both truth and falsehood.  Proverbs have been called stepping-stones for the mind.2  Truly they seem oftener stumbling-blocks; or if stepping-stones, at best slippery ones, leaving those who would take them on trust to the chances of a signal discomfiture.3  It is a rule, to which few exceptions will be found, that maxim-mongers, of which species every ones [sic] experience will furnish at least an individual, are not thinkers.  And the reason is evident.  We should imagine it would scarcely #be possible to find two minds, accustom to think for themselves whose thoughts on any identical subject would take in their expression the same form of words.#  No two human countenances were ever exactly alike in all their features and expressions, still less two human minds.  According to each individual application of it, according to the peculiarities of each individual mind, will be to that mind the relative proportion of truth and error which any4 contains.  To him who resolves the genuine result of his personal experience into one of these short sayings, that identical combination of words, and no other, exactly represents one definite state of mind, to him it is wholly truth.  But who that has, by experience and reflection made a proverb his own, but knows, that it is much more by what it implies, than by what it expresses that it is veritable.  ~Who shall say that the very same order of ideas is conveyed to another mind, by those words, which to him perfectly represent his thoughts?  It is probable that innumerable shades of variety, modify in each instance, the conception of every expression of thought: for which variety the imperfections of language offer no measure, and the differences of organization no proof.  To an honest~ and humble ~mind what a lesson of tolerance is included [in]5 this knowledge.~  he feels that ‘one touch of nature makes the whole world kin’6 &
~To such not a living human heart and brain but is like the planet
‘Whose worth’s unknown, although his height be taken’,7~ not one that has not much that is admirable, not one that in some one or other of its phases is not worthy of his interest and respect.  ~In this view we can comprehend that
‘all thoughts, all creeds, all dreams are true, 
all visions wild and strange,’8
to those who believe them, for after all we must come to that fine saying of the poet-philosopher,9 
‘Man is the measure of all truth 
unto himself’--~
In which term ‘Man’ we would have it to be borne in mind the duallism ‘Woman’ is also included.10  
	~Of the same signification, is that thought, as moral as profound, which has been so often in different ways expressed, yet which the universal practice of the world disproves its comprehension of, ‘Toute la moralité de nos actions est dans le jugement que nous en portons nous même’.  
	Dangerous, exclaims the blind follower of that sort of conscience which is the very opposite of consciousness:  would but people give up that conscience which consists only in conformity they would find the judgement of an enlightened consciousness proved by its results the voice of god. 
‘Our acts our angels are, or good or ill,
Our fatal shadows that walk by us still.’11
and to make them pleasant companions we must get rid not only of error, but of the moral sources from which it springs.~  Little has he observed who would say ‘what’s in a name’ when speaking of the popular mind.12 every thing is in a name, since every name however warped from its use from its etymological meaning represents a map of associations which must be represented by some word.   
13Incalculable is the evil produced by this word ‘conscience’ on the common mind.  †It signifies a phantom, yet a ghost whose power which is stronger than all the flesh and blood arguments of genuine morality.14†  °In its largest sense it can be but consciousness of arguments or discordance between our actions and our principles.°  Yet of all who familiarly employ the term how few are there who have15 any definite principle of action, fewer still who have defined their principle for themselves.  Indeed truly considered the phrases a ‘good con[science]’ a ‘bad con.’ so often on peoples [sic] lips, can designate either the one a right nor the other wrong moral state.  
	[C]onscienceness has reference not to the moral but to the intellectual condition:  therefore can imply blame, only as all neglect of faculties is blameworthy--and vice versa.  In proof of this let but each person who would employ the name ‘conscience’16 [construct] for themselves any fixed principle or system or think it necessary to do so.  They generally compose the class who glory in the name ‘matter-of-fact-people’ and who yet in this use of the word conscience as if it were some mysterious and innate and incomprehensible faculty, exercising incessant control over the whole life, transcend even German transcendentalism.
  	It has always been the interest of some class or other, to affix words of metaphysical vagueness to the notions of actual obligation by which they could profit.  Such is the word religion which all Priesthood has stood for the very comprehensible idea, pay.  Such is the world loyalty which with all Statesmen has [sic] stood for17         Such is the Honour of men of the world meaning immunity for the commision [sic] of any injury, if they are ready to shoot the injured on demand.  Such the word Virtue which women too often believe to be consistent with even positive vice of a disposition & so long as is maintained one negative quality.  All these words so debased in their use and so beautiful in themselves are the symbols of servitude or of freedom, according to the degree of mental vigour, and moral courage, which are brought to their interpretation.  Power has always known the secret of the potency of words of majestic or beautiful sound, and whether as ‘brother to the Moon and Lord of the Celestial Empire’ as ‘Successor to the Keys of St. Peter’, or as ‘Defendor of the Faith and most Christian King’, with Brutus have said to the multitude ‘lend me your ears’, and like that wily person have known how to make usurious interest from the loan.
	A euphonious, or spirit stirring-sentance [sic], even with little sense to recommend it acts more than they might like to admit on both wise and vulgar:  For ourselves we are not a wit ashamed of the proud swelling sensation which we always experience at the sound of the that high sounding and to us quite incomprehensable [sic] line of Mrs Hemans beautiful ballad
‘Tis the Cid             the Campeador!18
The charm of partial mystery all have felt whether conscious of it or not; it has the same source whether it be coveyed by a ballad legend, or whether the boundless beauty of the infinite sea produces that state of the combination of all the senses into one other & higher sense which is called enthusiasm.  It is the feeling connected with the very highest faculties of our nature. All19 make for themselves some hope or beleif [sic] which is infinite and of however low a kind still the existence of some desire or idea which is in its nature unattainable, and yet enduring, is the distinction of humanity.  The ‘longing after immortality’ is a logical reason for the ‘hope which is us’.
20Thus the word Virtue for how many different & opposite practices & thoughts has it stood--it has always answered the purposes of interested men to make it stand for this or that practice, but why has it always succeeded as a cover for interest because being in reality indifinite [sic], and capable of infinite latitude of comprehension it has always stood for each persons standard of ideal perfection--for each human being has such a standard.  however, how it may be placed, this fact is the destruction of humanity & this longing after the unattainable is the best reason for the hope which is in us. 
21Endurance is another of these phantom virtues.  now what is endurance, it is bearing evils wh are remediless, this is a necessity, not a virtue in itself, but only an occasion for fortitude, which if it come is a strength & a dignity, but that is not the virtue of endurance--is it bearing evils which we might change, but will not?  then our pseudo-virtue becomes matter of choice & so we may suppose of pleasure & there ends the virtue--or is it bearing lesser evil to avoid greater, that is a wise choice, but the credit then issue to the faculties of sagacity & clear-sightedness wh calculates the average justly--is it the sacrifice of our own happiness to the happiness of others this if wisely considered is heroism, not endurance, but that is an important one, for in nothing do people more decieve [sic] themselves than in the notion that they sacrifice their own happiness for that of others.  it is the flattering unction wh they lay to the soul who are too feeble to make the struggle for individual will--true where the will does not, ‘with the strong desire keep pace’ we may reasonably beleive [sic] the strength of the desire to have been a fallacy, but these are the people who extol the virtue of endurance--wh in such cases, means either the absence of a strong feeling of the mental or moral courage--a person of principle is one who has maturely [sic] weighed & chosen his opinions & whose conduct agrees with his opinions.

people who really do things from principle will rarely use the words right & duty--for they can give a specific reason for each action & are not forced to have recourse to these general & indefinite terms [&] expressions