The events of July, 1830, were charged with consequences not only to France, but to all Europe.  Nevertheless, the change in the French government which was then effected is less entitled to be called a revolution than that which, within the last few months, has given a new impulse to our own country.  It may be true that there exist in France many patriotic and thinking men, who see great evils in the constitution of their government, and who have, in their own minds, thoroughly digested the ideas upon which their hope for France relies.  That there is such a party cannot be doubted, nor that it existed with the same opinions, the same wishes and hopes, at the time when the change in the person of the chief magistrate of France took place.  To these men, most of whom are in some manner connected with the public press, may be fairly ascribed the praise of having incited the population of Paris to resistance to the ‘Ordinances.’ The people of Paris rose, as one man, to oppose that actual and definite attack upon the very foundation of the social compact.  But, as towards the great mass of the men who fought in the contest of the three days, the injury was exact and obvious, so was their remedy.  We believe that the political feeling which actuated the majority of the Parisian mob was simply,-  The men of genius had higher hopes and aims; they believed that, in addition to a weak and selfish monarch, they had faulty institutions.  They thought that the latter tended mainly to induce the former evil; and they desired, in changing the one, to reconstruct the other also.  It is in this that they were mistaken: they over-estimated the political education of the body of the French people, and, as it afterwards proved, the political honesty of many of their most trusted representatives.  The nation was not, in July, 1830, prepared unanimously to desire a change in their form of government.  They hoped to amalgamate popular government with the respectability of the monarchial name.  How far the efforts of Carlists1 and Philippists2 may now have induced them to alter their opinion, remains to be proved.  They may have reaped the knowledge of experience,--applicable alike to political and social arrangements,--that anomalous means are not likely to produce unity of effect.  The fact of so great a change as that of the ruling dynasty, wholly unforeseen by all but a numerically inconsiderable portion of the people, having been effected in three days, might be sufficient to warrant the presumption, that the plans, so hastily adopted, would be insufficient to the emergency.  The very fact of its being a revolution of three days may account for its proving so useless a revolution.
	Between the publication of the obnoxious decrees, which took place on the 26th of July, and the general uprising of the city, there intervened but a few hours.  Measures of resistance were conceived; men were called to think and to act without premeditation,--insecure of the strength of feeling of those to whom they had to look for support, and knowing that upon them rested the onus of recommencing a state of internal feud in France, not yet recovered from the storms of the conclusion of the eighteenth century;--weary after that terrible disorganization which yet had thrown off a vast mass of political disease, she was willing to endure much, rather than again evoke a power which had once been so tremendous.
	The moral character evinced by the actors of those three days was a glorious one; and the choice of the individual to place upon the vacant throne was the grand mistake.  The haste in which their election was made seems the only explanation of how such men as the leaders of July could, for a moment, have consented to admit as their leader such a man as the Duke of Orleans.
	We believe almost all parties agree in thinking France to be in a worse condition than during the administration of Charles X.; and why is this? Because, though the mass of people may have desired no revolution of institutions, yet they did desire a change in the character of their ruler; as it is, they have only changed one king for another, who is, as far as he dare show himself, of the same make and mould as his predecessor.  May he speedily follow on the same road!
	It is now seventeen years since the Bourbons returned to France--France, weary of turmoil, yearning for tranquillity, and prepared to welcome them, if not certainly with enthusiasm, yet with content and hope.  In such a complexion of things, how little might have sufficed to have awakened the gratitude of a generous and enthusiastic people.  That little was withheld, in conformity with the short-sightedness which seems to become inherent in hereditary rulers.
	The first measures of a restored dynasty, which might well have considered that it held the throne on sufferance, were either avowedly or in secret, to vitiate some of the most popular clauses of the newly-obtained charter.  Then came that insult to every free country--the invasion of Spain.  From the period, positive dislike took the place of indifference in the public mind towards Louis, but which fell yet more strongly on the intriguer Villèle.  Accordingly, it was seen needful to change the administration; and Charles may be said to have begun his reign with all the chances of popularity in his favour.  The people, with renewed hope, sent their Parliament popular members; and, showing towards the king affection and gratitude for this so small concession, ventured to believe him sincere.
	But, as of old, it may still be said ‘Put not your trust in princes.’  The liberal ministry found itself looked upon with suspicious eyes, and their measures, though rather those of conciliation and time--serving, than of effective remedy, were found to be neutralized by the secret machinations of the court and its advisers.  This was in 1829, and the month of August saw an ministry, with Polignac4 for its head, preparing to wield the sceptre of France.
	For all who had watched the progress of events, the names composing this cabinet afforded ample foresight of the measures to be expected.  An association was formed for the purpose, if needed, of resisting the payment of taxes.  The press performed its duty of warning, counselling, and encouraging.  The Tory ministers, intimidated for a time, endeavoured, without effect, to veil the designs of their government.  All was distrust and dissatisfaction on the part of the people, and on that of the ministry blind determination, when, in May, was convened the last parliament Charles X. was destined to meet.  The royal address was peremptory; the reply of the liberal members anxious and supplicatory, yet firm.  The refractory Chamber was speedily dismissed, with a view to corrupt the new elections.  But, spite of all the arts and the influence which the government could bring to bear on the returns of the electoral colleges, an immense majority for the popular cause appeared on the list of deputies.  No sooner was the fact of this majority decided, than were issued the ‘Ordinances;’ the first of which pronounces the Chamber dissolved before it had yet assembled; the second annulled the existing electoral laws, by which the Chamber had been appointed,--decreed the reduction of the number of representatives from 430 to 250, leaving to certain colleges, which had hitherto the privilege of electing, only that of recommending candidates, and abolished the vote by ballot; the third appointed the time for the meeting of the new assembly; the fourth abrogated the law which guaranteed the liberty of the press.  Such were the famous Ordinances of the 26th of July.  On the evening of the 27th, an attack was made by the royal troops on various groups which had assembled in the streets, but which had as yet manifested no intention of resorting to force.  By this attack the resolution of all Paris was determined.  At the time of the appearance of the Ordinances, Lafayette was at some leagues distance from Paris.  On receiving the intelligence, he hesitated not a moment in taking post; and in the evening of the 27th, put himself at the head of the insurgents.  On the morning of the 28th, the people, led by bands of the Polytechnic students, assembled in the principal avenues of the city, at each point met by detachments of troops.  At noon the Hotel de Ville was in the hands of the people, with whom, at the close of the day, it remained, after having been three times taken and retaken.  While this scene was transacting without, a meeting of editors of journals, by whom it had been convened, and of influential liberal deputies, was held, at which Lafayette opposed the hesitating counsels of the timid, and declared his resolution, whatever might be the result, to give the people the whole weight of his name and his experience.
	During the night of the 28th not less than one hundred thousand men were employed in active preparation for the struggle of the morrow.  The result of the next day was the complete triumph of the popular force over the royal troops, and the virtual dethronement of the elder branch of the Bourbon family.  At this time it would appear that neither the Duke of Orleans, who remained quietly at Neuilly, nor the people who had effected the revolution, had any idea of his succeeding to the throne.  There, however, existed a party, with M. Lafitte5 for its leader, who had long kept this object in view.  This party planned its measures quickly and well.  The body of the people hesitated between the desire to place the crown on the head of Lafayette and the policy of appointing a regency in the name either of the young Napoleon or in that of Henry the Fifth.  These regencies were both repeatedly offered to Lafayette, but this consistent republican steadily refused to compromise the principles of his life.  The event was the offer, first of Lieutenant Generalship, and then of the crown, to the head of the younger branch of the old dynasty.
	After the immediate excitement of this great effort had somewhat subsided, the men of the ‘Movement’ party began to look for the altered system, which alone could make the revolution valuable.  The most evident display of the spirit of the new government was to consist in its external policy.  With regard to this policy two courses presented themselves--the one was to cast aside the web of the old system of diplomacy, with all its entanglements, its hollowness, and its legitimacies, and in its stead to make all arrangements and relations of France correspond with the spirit of the revolution of 1830.  As respects the moralities of faith of treaties, it is plain that equity could not bind France to alliances made for, but not by, her--alliances, the whole tendency of which was opposed to her present condition and principles.  Were precedent to constitute a ground for disregarding them, there was sufficient example in the manner in which those of Amiens, of Presburg, and of Vienna had been violated by the very parties who now so loudly appealed to ‘the conscience of the king.’
	The non-intervention system had also its honest adherents, and, in the then state of France, had much to recommend it to deliberate men; that is to say, a true, and not a sham, non-intervention principle.  The word, in its government acceptation, has hitherto stood for non-intervention where any popular cause stood in need of it: it will be found to have been but little remembered when to forget it might promote the ascendancy of might over right.  In adopting neutrality for herself, France was called upon in consistency, wherever she had the power to maintain, and if needful to force, the neutrality of the governments which opposed themselves to her principles.  In this, the only just application of the principle of neutrality, the monarchy of July professed it concurrence; yet have we but to look to Italy, to Poland, or even to Belgium, to see in each instance its practical abandonment.
	The Lafitte ministry, with all its virtues of moderation, could never be brought to answer the purposes of either Louis-Philippe or of the people.  From the time that Louis-Philippe felt himself secure on the throne of his family, his whole bearing has displayed the strongest partiality towards, so called, legitimate measures; but, as nothing short of absolute madness would be implied in the attempt to carry out such principles in revolutionized France, he has contended himself with heading the timid and sophisticating party of the doctrinaires; a party which, however respectable as to talent,--at least if talent can be respectable without honesty,--yet, by their timidity, rest in that sort of good intentions with which it has been said hell is paved, and allow their fears to be a rational ground for the hopes of regalists of all degree.  The ministry, which may be called the ‘Guizot ministry,’ since M. Guizot,6 both by his literary reputation and his political bigotry, is the most prominent character therein, took office with the declared intention of making the organization of 1814 combine with the circumstances of 1830.  The lamentable absence of clear-sightedness, as to the requirements and the strength of popular feeling, which distinguishes this party and its leaders, MM. Guizot, Thiers,7 and Royer Collard,8 were amply evinced in the discussion on the question of hereditary peerage.  All thought that in an hereditary order was involved the very essence, the existence of the government. 
	Much of the same calibre were the prophetic wailings of the English conservatives on the social anarchy and destruction which were to follow our very innocent Reform Bill.  Both measures were successful; we have but to hope that their effects may be as wide-spread, though of a quite different sort, as those which interested alarmists have in both countries predicted.  Doctrines formed without the consideration of circumstances, and then blindly opposed to them, are as much, and no more, likely to stand than would be the chain-pier, if placed at the Land's End, to stem the vast sweep of the Atlantic.
	There can be no doubt that the state of things in France is again slowly tending towards a great moral or physical revolution.  That the former may suffice, all friends of humanity must desire; but, should that force of itself be insufficient to produce agreement between the spirit of the government and the spirit of the time, they will be no true friends of humanity who shall not welcome any power which, by means of some evil, may work the regeneration of the people who lead the political education of Europe.  As needful is it to be kept in mind by nations, as by individuals,
