This is a very tempting title, but a very disappointing book.  We know no distinguished person of late times, whose character was so likely to have been thoroughly displayed in his correspondence, as that of Mirabeau.  All that was good, as well as all that was bad in him, was matter of impulse.  Without either superstition on the one hand, or reflection on the other, he was wanting in fixed principles of action.  But with a strong, though vague, feeling of attachment to the cause of freedom, wrought almost into passion by reiterated attacks upon his own;
with acute perceptions, and a woman's talent of observation, we should have expected his really confidential correspondence to have been exceedingly curious and amusing.  The translator of these two volumes of letters, tells us, that there exist some hundreds of others of not inferior interest.  We cannot but fancy that with respect to those here given any change would have been for the better.  The Notice of the Life, Character, Conduct, and Writings of the Author, prefixed to them, forms a sort a ‘scandalosum supplementum’ to Dumont’s amusing memoir.  And surely the conservative spleen of the wickedest of Quarterly reviewers could not have made out a stronger case against a condemned radical author, than does, we suppose unconsciously, this pseudo-‘graphical delineator’ of poor much-abused and much bepraised Mirabeau.  The best part of the book is that which relates to the politics of the time.  Mirabeau was an enthusiast of the measures and character of Chatham, whose opinions and those of his celebrated son were on many subjects the opposite of each other; and on none did they differ more widely than those of religious toleration and ecclesiastical property.  The latter question was then beginning to be actively mooted in France, as it is now in our own country.
	Mirabeau saw, very clearly, the evils of the commonly received notion of the inviolability of foundations, whatever their object, or however unsuitable they might have become to the use or the intelligence of the time.  He saw that a government, meaning always by government the true representation of the national will, must inherently possess the right to alter, to abrogate, to suppress the distribution of its own pecuniary and physical means, as well as to change the spirit of its legislation, or the mode of its executive.  And this fact all see plainly enough, while it only is made to bear on a single law, or a slight change.  No one thinks of disputing the right of one parliament to alter the acts of a former.  It is not supposed that the legacy of opinion left by one set of men is to exercise any other influence over their successors than such as its inherent truth makes necessary; but there still remain an immense number of persons who are filled with a superstitious dread at the thought of making the best use of the property of a community because that property once belonged to individuals holding certain notions of usefulness:  so that with such, improvement is a question not of principles of justice, or of expediency even, but a problem of the least change which can be made to satisfy the demand for reformation.  How impossible that any man, or set of men, could judge the mode of employing their wealth most advantageously for the uses of a community, which should exist some six or eight centuries after their death!  Had a conscientious catholic of Mary's time bequeathed the income of a large estate to raise the piles which then periodically blazed in Smithfield, the vile intention would long since have been scouted.  The most determined defender of the sacredness of the designs of a founder would smile at such an instance.  Yet the instance is a possible one and if there exist a single indefensible case, the principle is virtually accorded, and the adhesion to the spirit of wills must become, as it should be in every individual instance, a question of general utility.  The license allowed in the testamentary distribution of property is continually producing the most mischievous effects.  Many years will not pass, we think, before this subject will be one of general consideration.  Neither in the material, nor in the moral constitution of things does there exist anything which is not in its nature liable to change.  
	We have no power to realise by our imagination the idea, changeless.  It is a term which can only be justly used in a comparative sense.  How unwise then is the attempt to set bounds to the progress of after times, by willing that the application of any portion of property shall be changeless.  A nation must always retain the right to dispose of its own possessions for its own benefit; and this benefit is subverted by the existence of any corporation which, constantly increasing in wealth and portionably in influence, has an interest in the state, directly opposed to that of the rest of the community.  Great indeed must be the virtue which, in these circumstances, can resist the temptation to become an instrument of mischief.  Mirabeau, desirous to avoid the necessity of making the clergy ex officio proprietors, yet anxious that none should be reduced to the miserable condition of being passing rich with forty pounds a-year, brought into the National Assembly a bill to fix the salaries of ministers of the established church, at a minimum of about 500£ sterling per annum.  It was carried by a large majority:--1st. and 2nd.  The remark which applied forty years since, becomes every day more true, that numbers, nay, we shall not be far wrong if we say the larger portion of those who are supported by the wealth of the church, neither practise its injunctions, nor believe in its doctrines.  Large as is the number of persons holding what are called deistical opinions, we believe, if it could be made matter of proof, it would appear, that a considerable proportion of such belong to that state church.  In one of the letters is this passage: Church reform, however, like all other reforms, must come.  And the signs of the times seem to point to this as the first.  To enter into the wide question of church property would exceed our present design.  Suffice it to record the opinions of this, on all political questions, most sagacious observer.  To those who would examine the subject for themselves, we would recommend the perusal of two pamphlets, which together pretty nearly exhaust the moral and legal arguments on the question.1  We shall need no apology for citing from one of them the following forcible sentences:--
 	We have somewhat dilated upon what, to us, was the most interesting topic of these letters.  But they contain much lively gossip and are not without scattered touches of humour and wit.  Some of Mirabeau's apophthegms run thus:--‘
	‘
	This is true only where the person of superior mind is placed in society unworthy of him; such as artificial or uneducated society.  The more the mind, either of man or woman, is enriched by acquirement and reflection, the more does it fit its possessor to give and to receive the highest species of enjoyment, social usefulness, and sympathy.
	We fear there are too many who, like the Abbé de Languerne, can enjoy nothing which has not the evidence for its immediate utility stamped upon its front.  
	That ‘vices are more frequently habits than passions,’ is a reflection as just in its observation of nature, as benevolent and useful in application.  It would be easy to find many equally good things; and the book is, on the whole, an amusing one, though not of the kind we had been led to expect.
